Our worldwide brotherhood
is truly special.
When our brothers are in need,
we want to help
in whatever way possible.
It also brings us great joy
to be with our brothers
—whether at the meetings,
in the field service,
or on other occasions.
We love our brothers
and enjoy spending time with them.
At the same time,
because we are all imperfect,
our love and unity will be tested.
We may have our feelings hurt,
or we may hurt
the feelings of others.
That brings me to the theme
I would like to discuss
with you
in this month’s program,
“Settling Differences
Brings Jehovah’s Favor.”
It is based on Matthew 6:14.
Let’s read
this important verse together.
Right after teaching
his disciples how to pray,
Jesus says in verse 14:
“For if you forgive
men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father
will also forgive you.”
To what extent do Jesus’ words
affect how Jehovah
views what we do each day
in our worship to him?
Consider this:
You’re concluding
your day in prayer.
You pray for Jehovah’s name
to be sanctified.
You pray
for his Kingdom to come.
You ask that he bless
the Governing Body
and the brothers taking the lead.
You share with him
a few matters
of personal concern.
And then you say: “Jehovah,
“I know I am imperfect,
“and I sin against you often.
“Please forgive me
for my sins.
“Let me stand before you
in a clean
and approved state.”
Now the question is,
Has Jehovah heard
your heartfelt request?
Will he forgive you?
Well, what did Jesus say?
Look again at verse 14:
“For if you forgive
men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father
will also forgive you.”
Did you notice
Jesus’ use of the word “if”?
That tells us that forgiveness
is not automatic.
It comes with a condition, or price.
What price?
According to Jesus,
‘if we forgive others,’
the condition has been met;
the price has been paid.
What will Jehovah do for us?
Jesus said:
“[He] will also forgive you.”
Really, though,
is it fair or reasonable
for Jehovah to say to us,
‘Only if you forgive others,
then I will also forgive you’?
Well, suppose you
get very sick and lose your job.
You’re unable
to pay rent for many months.
Your situation is desperate.
You have very few,
if any, options.
You worry about your wife
and your children.
Say you go to the owner
of the house and ask
if he would give you time
to get back on your feet.
Once you get better
and are able to work again,
you will do everything
within your power
to pay him what you owe.
He tells you not to worry.
He understands your situation.
He will cancel your debt,
and you do not have
to pay him any rent
until your situation improves.
In fact, he’ll cover
your monthly expenses
until you are able
to care for your family.
How would you feel
about what he has done,
and would this affect
how you treat others?
Well, because of our sinful nature,
we are all in debt to Jehovah
—deserving of death.
We are unable
to cover our expenses.
But when we go
to Jehovah in prayer
and beg for his help,
in his great mercy and kindness,
he tells us not to worry.
He has given the life
of his Son to pay our debt.
And on the basis of that sacrifice,
He is willing to cover our expenses
—the sins we commit daily—
and to extend forgiveness
to us until we are able
to get back on our feet,
when we reach perfection
in the new world.
So think again about those
simple yet powerful words
of Jesus at Matthew 6:14:
“For if you forgive
men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father
will also forgive you.”
Is that fair?
Is that reasonable?
Is it realistic?
Without a doubt!
In fact, settling differences,
or forgiving others freely,
is one of the best ways to imitate
Jehovah’s compassionate
and merciful nature.
What can help us
to settle differences quickly?
The first thing
we should do is to try
and let love cover
over the wrong.
Can I just forgive and forget?
If we are able to do so,
this is a beautiful way to maintain
the congregation’s peace and unity.
But if we’re struggling
to forget the wrong,
there are two scriptures
that are especially helpful
in this matter
of settling differences.
They are Matthew 5:23, 24
and Matthew 18:15-17.
Keep in mind that these texts
are not referring
to the same scenarios,
nor are they to be applied
in the exact same way.
Matthew chapter 5
has a broader application
and can be used to bring peace
in most situations.
Matthew chapter 18
has a more limited application
and applies to specific situations
that are more serious in nature.
Now let’s consider the first text,
Matthew 5:23, 24:
“If, then,
you are bringing your gift to the altar
“and there you remember that
your brother has something against you,
“leave your gift there
in front of the altar, and go away.
“First make your peace
with your brother,
and then come back
and offer your gift.”
To truly capture
what these two brief verses mean
for you and me today,
we have to understand
what Jesus’ words meant
to his first-century Jewish listeners.
Picture the scene in your mind
as we transport ourselves
into the city of Jerusalem
some 2,000 years ago.
It is during one
of the annual festivals.
There are tens of thousands
of people in the city.
You are there to make your sacrifice
—a beautiful lamb.
The best one you have.
It’s clean and unblemished.
You take the lamb
through a series of courts
all the way
to the Court of Priests.
It has taken you
most of the day to get there.
Now you’re ready
to put your hands on that animal
and offer a prayer for forgiveness,
and then you remember something.
What?
Verse 23 reads:
“If, then, you are bringing
your gift to the altar
“and there you remember
that your brother
has something against you,”
Now you think:
‘My brother
‘does have
something against me!
‘The last time I saw him,
‘he greeted
everybody else but me.
‘He was upset.
But what is it?
‘I don’t remember
doing anything.
‘He is so sensitive!
He’s always upset
with something.’
Did Jesus
have all of that in mind
when he said
what he did in verse 23?
No!
He did not go into detail
about what
that “something” might be.
He doesn’t say
who is right or wrong.
He doesn’t make a comment
about whether
someone is too sensitive,
always getting upset,
never satisfied,
difficult to get along with.
Why not?
Because the reason
behind the “something”
is not the important thing.
What is the important thing?
That the peace
has been disturbed.
There is a difference
that needs to be settled.
The lack of peace
between brothers
could affect their relationship
with Jehovah.
That is important!
So what should be done?
We see the answer in verse 24:
“Leave your gift there
“in front of the altar,
and go away.
“First make your peace
with your brother,
and then come back
and offer your gift.”
That animal sacrifice
is important too.
There’s no doubt about that.
It represents worship to Jehovah
—like going to the meetings,
in the field service,
sharing in family worship.
But according to Jesus,
what is more important?
It is settling the difference
—making peace
with our brother first.
Then we will be
in an acceptable position
to offer our gift
of worship to Jehovah.
Yes, settling differences
will bring Jehovah’s favor.
But when can we apply
the principle of Matthew 5?
Whenever there is
a difference to be settled.
Perhaps our brother
misunderstood what we said or did.
Or maybe he didn’t misunderstand
—maybe we did give him
a valid reason to be hurt.
Regardless, we notice
that he has something against us.
In that case, we make peace.
We can also use
the principles of this text
when we are hurt
or have something
against our brother.
We can take the initiative ourselves
to settle misunderstandings,
to resolve differences,
and to make peace
with our brother.
Again, Jehovah blesses
such a spirit.
Now, open your Bible
to Matthew chapter 18.
We mentioned earlier that it has
a more limited application.
How so?
Notice verse 15:
“Moreover,
if your brother commits a sin,
“go and reveal his fault
between you and him alone.
If he listens to you,
you have gained your brother.”
Here Jesus says,
“if your brother commits a sin.”
That is much different
than just having
“something against [us].”
We are talking about a situation
that is much more serious.
What situation?
The revised
Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will book,
page 136, explains
that it “involves financial
or property matters,
“such as failing to repay a loan
“or committing fraud.
“Or the offense
might be slander,
which seriously affects
someone’s reputation.”
Of course,
they are sins that could be resolved
between the individuals concerned
but are also serious enough
to merit expulsion
from the congregation if not settled.
Before we start applying
Matthew 18:15,
we should first consider
whether it is really necessary
to pursue the matter.
Could we simply
forgive the individual
for what was done
or even take the loss
if it were a financial matter?
That is a personal decision.
If we decide to pursue the matter,
what do we do?
Jesus helps us in verse 15,
when he says
that we reveal his fault
between the two of us alone.
We do not discuss
the matter with others,
attempting to get them
to side with us.
We do not go
straight to the elders
and try to get them
to solve the problem for us.
No, we try to resolve
the matter between us.
And since our goal
is to settle the difference,
maintain our relationship
with Jehovah,
and help our brother do the same,
we make repeated efforts
to speak with him
when our initial efforts
are unsuccessful.
Keep in mind
that Jesus did not say:
“Go only once
and reveal his fault.”
When applying this first step,
make it clear
that your motive
is to ‘gain your brother.’
Also, it would be helpful
to clearly state
that you are applying
the first step in settling differences
as outlined by Jesus
at Matthew 18:15.
Of course,
this would be stated in a kindly,
nonthreatening manner
but still in a way
to show the seriousness
of getting the matter settled.
What if the first step
in gaining your brother
is unsuccessful?
Notice verse 16 explains step 2:
“But if he does not listen,
“take along with you
one or two more,
“so that on the testimony
of two or three witnesses
every matter
may be established.”
Yes, we talk with him
in the company of one or two more.
Would that be our best friends?
No.
The whole purpose
is to ‘gain our brother.’
Teaming up with two
of our best friends
could alienate our brother.
Instead, it makes sense
that we would choose
other mature Christians.
How would mature Christians
be helpful?
Well, are we
misunderstanding things?
Could they help him
to reason about the matter?
Could a solution be found?
Having spiritually
mature witnesses there
may help to resolve the matter.
Generally, applying steps 1
and 2 will result
in gaining your brother
and preserving the peace
of the congregation.
If he does not respond
to these repeated efforts
to help him, then what?
You have a decision to make.
Are you willing
to forgive your brother,
even take a loss
if a financial matter is involved?
If you choose
to pursue the matter further,
listen to Jesus’ words recorded
at verse 17:
“If he does not listen to them,
“speak to the congregation.
“If he does not listen
even to the congregation,
“let him be to you
just as a man of the nations
and as a tax collector.”
At this point,
the body of elders
representing the congregation
will get involved.
They will review
the facts of the case and determine
if a judicial committee
should be appointed.
Happily, though,
these situations are rare,
and matters
are often resolved peacefully
before reaching
such a serious point.
Think back again
to that heartfelt prayer to Jehovah.
Has Jehovah heard
our sincere requests?
Will he forgive?
Well, at this moment,
if you realize there is a difference
with your brother
that needs to be settled,
pray to Jehovah about the matter.
Ask him to help you see
beyond the emotion
and make peace.
Do not let any more time go by!
Once we have followed
the simple steps outlined by Jesus
and have forgiven others,
the condition has been met;
the price has been paid.
Then what will Jehovah
do for us?
Jesus said:
‘He will also forgive us.’
As a result,
we will gain the peace of mind
that comes with a clean conscience,
knowing that we have
Jehovah’s favor and blessing.
We can then
make a valuable contribution
to the beautiful,
united brotherhood
that we are privileged
to be a part of.